The Nile is a major north-flowing river in northeast Africa which empties into the Mediterranean Sea. At 7,088 kilometers (4,404 mi) long, it is the longest river in the world, although the volume of water it carries is much smaller than other major rivers such as the Amazon or the Congo. The Nile has played a central role in the environmental, economic, and cultural history of Africa for millennia.
The Nile has two major tributaries: the White Nile and the Blue Nile. The White Nile is longer and is considered to be the headwaters, yet the Blue Nile contributes over twice the water volume of the White Nile. The White Nile begins near Lake Victoria and flows through Uganda and South Sudan, while the Blue Nile begins near Lake Tana in Ethiopia and flows into Sudan from the southeast. The two rivers meet at the Sudanese capital, Khartoum. From there, the Nile flows north through the Nubian Desert to Egypt's capital, Cairo, and finally empties into the Mediterranean Sea near Alexandria, where it has formed a large river delta.
Geologically, the Nile is a young river, having followed its present course for about 15,000 years. Its drainage basin extends across eleven countries. Most of the water in the Nile comes from rainfall in the upstream countries Ethiopia, Kenya, Tanzania, and Uganda. Downstream countries – Egypt, Sudan, and South Sudan – are primarily desert and withdraw river water for irrigation. Other countries that lie wholly or partly in the Nile Basin are Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Eritrea, and Rwanda.
The Nile was the foundation of the Ancient Egyptian civilization, which relied on the river for nearly every aspect of life. The annual flooding of the river deposited nutrient-rich silt along the riverbanks. This soil supported crops that enabled a sophisticated society to thrive in an otherwise inhospitable desert. The Nile facilitated trade, communication, transportation, and governance. South (upstream) of the second Nile cataract lay Nubia, the historical home of the ancient Kerma culture and the Kushite Empire. Many Europeans were fascinated by the Nile, and their explorations around Lake Victoria in the late 19th century located the source of the river. Among the cultures that live along the Nile in the modern era are the Nilotic peoples, semi-nomadic cattle herders who practice nomadic pastoralism, moving their cattle seasonally in response to the Nile's floods.
In the modern era, the Nile plays a critical role in the economies of Egypt and Sudan, which rely on it to irrigate extensive croplands. Since the late 20th century, over a dozen dams have been built in the Nile Basin to provide for irrigation and to generate electricity. The dams have altered the river's annual flood cycle and restricted the transport of silt downstream, causing the Nile Delta to shrink. Some dams – such as the Aswan High Dam and Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam – have been the source of international political disputes about water scarcity, safety, food security, and forced displacement of peoples.

The English word "Nile" is derived from the Latin Nilus and the Ancient Greek Νεῖλος (Neilos), which possibly originated from the Semitic term naḥal, meaning 'river'.

In the ancient Egyptian language, the same word was used for 'Nile' and 'river': jtrw. Egyptians called their country kmt meaning 'black', in reference to the dark color of the Nile floodwaters as they carried sediment from upriver. The English name "Blue Nile" is a translation of the Arabic name Al-Baḥr Al-Azraq.
In the modern era, the river goes by several names within the Nile Basin. In Egypt, it is referred to as Al-Nīl, Baḥr Al-Nīl or Nahr Al-Nīl. In South Sudan, it is sometimes referred to by the Arabic Baḥr el-Jebel, بحر الجبل, literally 'Mountain River'. In Uganda, the speakers of Luganda use the name Kiyira. Some Nubian peoples of Egypt and Sudan use the Nobiin name Áman Dawū ('Great Water').
Several tributaries (smaller rivers that merge into the Nile) and segments of the river incorporate "Nile" in their names, including the following:

Albert Nile – Segment of the White Nile flowing north from Lake Albert to Nimule
Black Nile – An alternate name for the Atbarah River
Blue Nile – One of the two major tributaries of the Nile
Kyoga Nile – Segment of the White Nile from Lake Kyoga to Lake Albert
Main Nile – Segment of the Nile downstream from the confluence of Blue Nile and White Nile
Mountain Nile – Segment of the White Nile from the mountains of Uganda to the plains of South Sudan
Victoria Nile – Segment of the White Nile from Lake Victoria to Lake Kyoga
White Nile – One of the two major tributaries of the Nile
Yellow Nile – The Wadi Howar, remnant of an ancient tributary that dried up several thousand years ago